OPNAV M-5100.23
5 Jun 2020

SECTION B.  SAFETY PROGRAMS

CHAPTER 1
ORGANIZATION AND COORDINATION

Ref: (a) DoD Instruction 6055.01, DoD Safety and Occupational Health Program, 14 Oct
2014
(b) SECNAVINST 5100.10K Department of the Navy Safety Program, 12 May 2015

B0101.  Discussion

a. The Safety and Occupational Health (SOH) program gained special prominence after
passage of the Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) Act on 31 December 1970.  Although the
primary thrust of the OSH Act was directed at the private sector employer, section 19 of the OSH
Act directed federal agencies to establish and maintain comprehensive and effective OSH
programs consistent with the standards issued under Section 6 of the OSH Act.

b. On 26 July 1971, the President signed Executive Order (E.O.) 11612, entitled
Occupational Safety and Health Programs for Federal Employees.  This E.O. stated the U.S.
Government, as the nation's largest employer, has a special obligation to set an example for safe
and healthful employment.  It directed the head of each federal department and agency to
establish an SOH program in compliance with section 19 of the OSH Act.  Over the next 3 years,
many federal agencies made only moderate progress.  Consequently, Congress received
considerable criticism for a perceived double standard in SOH requirements between the private
sector and federal agencies.  As a result, the President issued E.O. 11807 in 1974, which replaced
E.O. 11612 and more clearly defined the scope, requirements, and responsibilities of federal
agency programs.  In addition, E.O. 11807 tasked the Secretary of Labor to issue guidelines
designed to assist federal agencies in establishing their programs.  The Secretary issued these
guidelines on 9 October 1974 as part 1960 of title 29, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Safety
and Health Provisions for Federal Employees.

c. These actions described still did not satisfy some critics since several federal agencies
questioned the regulatory authority of the Secretary of the Labor guidelines (29 CFR 1960).
Addressing this issue, on 26 February 1980, the President signed E.O. 12196, Occupational
Safety and Health Programs for Federal Employees, superseding E.O. 11807.  The Secretary of
Labor revised DOL guidelines (29 CFR 1960) on 21 October 1980 and reissued them as Basic
Program Elements for Federal Employee Occupational Safety and Health Programs.

B0102.  Scope

a. SOH is a core value in all Navy operations and commands, units and activities.  The
primary mission is to prevent mishaps, save lives, and preserve combat readiness.  This safety
program manual provides Navy commanders, commanding officers, and officers in charge;

B1-1OPNAV M-5100.23
5 Jun 2020

military and civilian supervisors; safety managers; safety and occupational health professionals;
industrial hygienists; occupational medical professionals; collateral duty safety officers;
operators; design agents and life-cycle managers; installation managers; and Navy military and
civilian employees with comprehensive and effective policy guidance, tools, and training to
support operational readiness and sustainability, in compliance with safety laws, regulations, and
Executive Orders (E.O.), across the Navy Enterprise.

b. This manual implements requirement of the Occupational Safety and health Act of 1970
as implemented in Executive order 12196; Title 29 Code of Federal Regulation 1960; and
Department of Defense Instructions 6055.01, 6055.04, and 6055.07.  It directs commands, units,
and activities, regardless of warfare community, to comply with the program elements in this
manual as well as any additional guidance from other applicable policy.  It provides clarifying
guidance for uniquely military equipment, systems, and operations or other special conditions
and provides new policy on Navy safety management procedures with special emphasis on
responsibilities and organizational concepts.  All subsequent Navy safety program related
instructions, manuals, guidance, and directives derived from this manual must be aligned with
the direction set forth herein.

c. This manual implements references (a) and (b) and provides policy, procedures, and
guidance for the SOH program for the Navy.

B0103. Related Chapters.  Each chapter in this manual covers a specific safety program or
element.  Some safety programs, as well as elements, are related or overlap.  In addition, the
chapters purposefully do not cover all SOH standards (i.e., laws, rules, regulations, instructions,
etc.).  They are written to provide Navy specific guidance and ensure consistency throughout the
Navy enterprise.

B0104. Standards

a. The Navy must also comply with SOH standards issued for the private sector by the
Secretary of Labor, under section 6 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSH Act),
including emergency temporary standards.  The Office of the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO)
and the CNO Special Assistant for Safety Matters (CNO N09F) are the only authorities to
approve U.S. Navy deviations, waivers, or alternate SOH standards resulting from the
application of reference (a) (e.g., military unique operations).  This approval must be in writing,
and may be in the form of an Office of the Chief of Naval Operations instruction (OPNAVINST)
or manual (OPNAV M), or letter signed out by CNO N09F.

(1) This manual adopts all applicable U.S. Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) laws and regulations including emergency temporary standards OSHA
issues under the provision of the OSH Act, as well as national consensus standards that have
been “incorporated by reference.”  The OSHA laws and regulations, any emergency temporary
standards still in effect, and any national consensus standards incorporated by reference, are

B1-2OPNAV M-5100.23
5 Jun 2020

collectively referred to, both in this directive and industry, as “OSHA standards.”  It is not
possible to list every reference that may be applicable as Navy operations and commands, units
and activities vary greatly and invoke a variety of standards including, but not limited to, general
industry, maritime, and construction.  Throughout the manual, the key references applicable to
each chapter at the top of the chapter.

Note:  Most of the national consensus standards that OSHA incorporated by reference, were
done so in the early formative years of that administration.  Once a national consensus
standard is incorporated by reference into either a law or regulation, it is no longer referred to
as a national consensus standard.  National consensus standards (i.e., also known as “industry
standards”) are voluntary, typically copyright protected, and periodically updated by their
respective standards organizations (e.g., American National Standards Institute, American
Society of Safety Professionals, etc.).

(2) The use of OSHA standards may simply refer to a specific OSHA standard (e.g., 29
CFR 1910.95), or may paraphrase, transpose, or otherwise adopt the standard without altering
the basic criteria (unless the alteration applies to more stringent criteria, such as lower exposure
limits, increased monitoring frequency, etc.).  In all cases, the Navy must comply with the latest
edition of an OSHA standard or a national consensus standard.

b. Occupational Exposure Limits for Chemical Contaminants.  The Navy will use the listed
hierarchy of occupational exposure limits (OELs) for chemicals:

(1) OSHA Permissible Exposure Limits (PELs).

(2) Navy developed or adopted OEL’s.  When both the Navy and OSHA have standards
applicable to a given situation, commands, activities, and units will use the more stringent of the
two.

(3) American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) Threshold
Limit Values (TLVs) where OSHA PELs or Navy OELs do not exist. Use of TLVs represent
best practices, i.e., risk management goals to achieve using risk management practices. When the
OSHA PEL is less stringent, the ACGIH TLVs will be included in reports of data to supplement
the OSHA PEL and provide additional context to aid the risk management process.  However,
the OSHA PEL remains the legally binding standard.

(4) Nationally recognized industrial hygiene best practices may be used as to supplement
the OEL hierarchy.  The Industrial Hygienist will use professional judgement to recommend
appropriate OEL guidelines, when appropriate, to aid the risk management process in a given
situation. Sources include but are not limited to:

(i) California OSHA (Cal/OSHA) PELS.

B1-3OPNAV M-5100.23
5 Jun 2020

(ii) National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) recommended
exposure limits (RELs) or risk management limits for carcinogens (RMLs-CA).

(iii) Occupational Alliance for Risk Science (OARS) Workplace Environmental
Exposure Levels (WHEELs).

c. Alternate OSHA standards that the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Environmental
Security) (DUSD(ES)) authorizes, subject to Secretary of the Navy (SECNAV) approval.

d. Special DoD or Navy standards, rules, and regulations, or technical publications that
govern the on-the-job safety and health applicable to military unique equipment, systems, and
operations.

e. Other than those specified in paragraph B0104(b) when there is no DoD, DON, or OSHA
standard available, the Navy hereby adopts nationally recognized sources of SOH guidance (i.e.,
ACGIH, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA), and National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)).  If
there are conflicts, CNO N09F can clarify.

f. Certain operations are subject to mandatory safety standards or rules derived from
separate or specific statutory authority (e.g., explosive safety standards issued under the authority
of section 172 (1970) of title 10, U.S.C., and Nuclear Safety and Health Standards issued under
the authority of sections 2012, 2021, 2121(b), and 2201(b) (1976) of title 42, U.S.C.).  Provided
there is no substantive conflict, the application of these special functional standards does not
exempt any workplace from other SOH standards that address conditions not specifically
covered by the special rules.  For example, a naval weapons station is subject to special
explosive safety standards and is also subject to SOH standards for machine guarding, eye
protection, etc.

g. In overseas workplaces, where a status of forces agreement specifies different standards,
those standards take precedence, subject to the same limiting rationale set forth in Chapter 1,
paragraph B0104b of this Manual.

h. Where personnel of different DoD components or of DoD components and other federal
agencies work in the same installations, host-agency standards must govern the DoD components
and other federal agencies involved.  When other agency standards conflict with OSHA
standards, DoD components should refer the matter to Assistant Secretary of Defense (Energy,
Installations & Environment) for adjudication.

B0105.  Alternate Standard/Deviation/Waiver Process.  Although OSHA standards and OEL’s
apply to all Navy workplaces, worldwide, without regard to warfare community, there are times
when complete or partial compliance with the established standards is not possible due to the
uniquely military equipment, systems and operations or other special condition.  In these

B1-4OPNAV M-5100.23
5 Jun 2020

situations, CNO N09F can grant written approval for deviations or waivers, as well as coordinate
with applicable stakeholders for SOH alternate standards.  In each of these cases, the safety risk
management and safety assurance procedures instituted must be detailed.  In addition, the
package must show how the proposed change for the deviation or waiver will be at least equally
protective as the original standard.  Packages must be prepared by the affected command, unit, or
activity and routed up their respective chains of command.  The request will be submitted up the
administrative chain of command(s) to CNO N09F/ COMNAVSAFECEN.

B0106.  Process for Requesting Interpretations.  The following process will be used to request
official interpretation of OPNAV safety policy.  Official requests for interpretation and all
responses must be in writing.

a. The requester must:

(1) Specifically identify the requirement for interpretation;

(2) Provide the exact citation and quote the requirement in question. A separate request
must be made for each requirement;

(3) State source of confusion regarding the requirement;

(4) Provide all the information necessary to understand the context in which the
requirement is being applied;

(5) Provide interpretation of the requirement and rationale.

b. The request will be submitted up the administrative chain of command(s) to CNO N09F.

c. Interpretations apply only to the specific time and the context in which the requirement is
being applied. They may not be used as precedents to determine future applications of the
requirement. CNO N09F will make the proper notifications if an interpretation may be applied
globally.

d. Unofficial requests for interpretations/clarifications of requirements from local SOHs
may be made via email or telephone.  However, the answers provided via this mode will be
considered general guidance, not official interpretations.

B1-5